DM-49840: First draft (#1)
lsst-dm/dmtn-318: index.md

## Issuing DOIs

The [Department of Energy Office of Scientific and Technical Information](https://www.osti.gov) provides to DOE grant holders the ability to issue DOIs through their E-Link service.
Given that the NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory is part-funded by the DOE we are allowed to use this mechanism to issue DOIs.
For instrument and dataset DOIs it was agreed that we are allowed to use `lsst.io` as the formal landing pages for each DOI.

## Instrument DOIs

OSTI allows instrumentation to be given DOIs.
Doing this allows us to reference all our data releases to the instrument that generated the data.
This is an extremely useful way to anchor the observatory outputs and science users should be encouraged to cite the instrument DOI explicitly.

As part of the Data Preview 1 activity {cite:p}`RTN-085` we demonstrated this by creating a DOI for LSSTComCam {cite:p}`10.71929/rubin/2561361`.

> We intend to create DOIs for both LATISS and LSSTCam.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We intend to create DOIs for both LATISS and LSSTCam as well.
```

## Data Release DOIs

Rubin Observatory plans to make annual data releases of the Legacy Survey of Space and Time {cite:p}`2019ApJ...873..111I`.

> There will always be an umbrella DOI issued for the entire data release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There will always be an umbrella DOI issued for each data release *as a whole*.
```

From a citation tracking perspective this is the minimum requirement, but we know that there will be very few papers published that really make use of the full set of imaging and catalog data.

> Furthermore, Independent Data Access Centers (IDACs) {cite:p}`RTN-003` are not going to be taking copies of full data release and instead are likely to restrict their holdings to, for example, the object catalog and deep coadd images, or even a version of the object catalog with a subset of the columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, Independent Data Access Centers (IDACs) {cite:p}`RTN-003` are not going to be taking copies of full data release and instead are likely to restrict their holdings to, for example, the object catalog and deep coadd images, or even a version of the object catalog with a subset of the columns
(sometimes called "Object Lite").
```

IDACs will be encouraged to create DOIs for their holdings that explicitly link back to the primary data release archive.
To enable this we intend to issue DOIs to every catalog (object, source, forced source, etc) and every Data Butler {cite:p}`2022SPIE12189E..11J` dataset type (visit images, difference images, co-adds).

An open question is whether to create DOIs for "virtual" Butler data products that can be regenerated on demand.

### Relationships

DOIs much more useful if relationships to other DOIs are specified in the metadata.

> [DataCite](https://support.datacite.org/docs/connecting-to-works) and [Crossref](https://www.crossref.org/documentation/schema-library/markup-guide-metadata-segments/relationships/) specify how relationships between DOIs are specified and we will relate dataset DOIs in the following way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[DataCite](https://support.datacite.org/docs/connecting-to-works) and [Crossref](https://www.crossref.org/documentation/schema-library/markup-guide-metadata-segments/relationships/) specify how relationships between DOIs are specified and we will relate release, dataset, and instrument DOIs in the following ways:
```

* The data release dataset "isCollectedBy" the instrument.
* The catalog and dataset type component DOIs will be declared as "isPartOf" the main data release DOI.
* If an IDAC creates a DOI for their copy of a component they shall use "isIdenticalTo" the original dataset. (How do we know which was the original version?)
* If an IDAC has a cut down version of a catalog (e.g., "object lite") then that version "isVariantFormOf" the original full catalog.
* If a data release includes Butler datasets that contain tabular data (for example in Parquet files) that are also available as catalogs in Qserv, then the catalog DOI "isVariantFormOf" the Butler dataset to indicate that they are almost, but not exactly, the same data.[^dp1_parquet]
* A new data release "Obsoletes" a previous data release.[^dp1]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A new release's catalog dataset (e.g., "Object") also "Obsoletes" the corresponding catalog dataset in the previous release.

```

## References

```{bibliography}
  :style: lsst_aa
```

[^dp1]: Data Preview 1 is not obsoleted by Data Preview 2 since they are completely distinct datasets.

> [^dp1_parquet]: Data Preview 1 does not include any tabular butler datasets.

Reviewer: I don't think this is true.

Author: Indeed. I do see that we have "object" parquet files in dp1. In the rsp_lsst_io pages we only have one entry for "Object" as a whole that doesn't distinguish between butler dataset vs searchable catalog.
